# API Versioning

Kubernetes does not make API versioning easy.

The most common guidance we hear effectively boils down to the idea that, once
you add a field to an API, you're stuck with it: there's no reasonable way to
remove it or to change its semantics.

Unfortunately, this is a major problem. There's no such thing as a perfect API
designer or a perfect API design: we will make mistakes, and the only way to
manage those mistakes is with feedback from people using the API. Sometimes,
correctly responding to the feedback _requires_ a breaking change to the API.

Gateway API recognized this fact of design from early on, and defined the
experimental release channel explicitly to be a place to allow for the kinds
of breaking changes that good design will run into (and, indeed, Gateway API
has already run into this). Unfortunately, Gateway API has now started seeing
some problems looming in the future that need to be addressed now, before the
situation gets worse:

- Many users of cloud clusters seem to want the cluster provider to install
  Gateway API for them. In turn, the cloud providers seem less and less
  inclined to let the user choose to install the experimental channel. For end
  users of the stable channel, this is likely not a bad thing. For Gateway API
  developers, or for users who are trying to provide feedback about
  experimental features, this is an enormous problem.

  Ultimately, we need a way to allow users to work with experimental features
  _without_ relying on help from the cloud providers.

- As the features that an end user is interested in move from experimental to
  stable, the end user is likely to want to move their clusters off the
  experimental channel and onto the stable channel. This implies that we need
  a safe way to make that move.

  "Safe" here mostly means that we need to be able to ensure that anyone using
  the experimental channel can definitively know that everything they're using
  is actually supported by the stable channel -- in other words, they need a
  way to be certain that every field that they're using in any Gateway API
  resource must be present, with the same semantics, in the stable channel.

  This runs headlong into the problem that Kubernetes itself _does not
  actually support versioning of resources_, as we'll discuss below. This
  makes it _extremely_ difficult to talk about comparing two versions of a
  resource.

Taken together, Gateway API is in a pretty rough spot here. It's worth noting
that the experimental/stable split in Gateway API didn't cause the problems
we're seeing: any Kubernetes API that actively tries to support rapid change
will hit these issues. Gateway API just happens to be first, because of its
degree of collaboration and uptake.

This document attempts to summarize why API versioning is such a challenge in
Kubernetes, what we _can't_ do about that in reasonable timeframes, what we
_can_ do about it, and how we can make the best of the situation as API
designers.

**One critical note:** in the rest of this document, I'm mostly going to talk
about custom resources, and as I do so, I will be using _CRD_ to refer to the
definition of the custom resource type, and _CR_ to refer to specific
resources of those types. I'm calling this out because we often use CRD and CR
kind of interchangeably, and I am _not doing that_ here.

## Why is This So Hard?

The root of the problem is that Kubernetes resources _don't have versions_;
instead, what has a version is the _presentation of the resource_ when a
caller requests a resource.

This is a wildly counterintuitive idea, so let's dig into it a bit.

### The Kubernetes API server

The API server has a lot of jobs, but the ones we're most concerned here have
to do with resources: specifically, storing resources and fetching resources.

When storing or fetching a resource, the protocol between the client and the
API server always includes:

- the _group_ (e.g. `gateway.networking.k8s.io`);
- the _kind_ (e.g. `HTTPRoute`);
- the _apiVersion_ (e.g. `v1alpha1`); and
- the _name_ (and _namespace_ if applicable) of the resource.

The name and namespace together are a unique identification of a specific
instance of a resource; the group and kind together identify what type of
resource it is. That leaves the apiVersion, which people usually describe as
identifying the version of the resource. However, that's not correct.

What the apiVersion actually identifies is the version of the schema used for
a specific transaction, not the version of the resource. The API server
doesn't store the version anywhere, and it can't translate between versions.
What it can do is:

1. Use the group, kind, and apiVersion together to find an OpenAPI schema.
2a. Use that schema to validate an incoming resource when storing, or
2b. Use that schema to determine which fields to send when fetching.

That's it. The API server doesn't know what version of the resource is stored;
it just has a bunch of fields and values that it can find using the group,
kind, name, and namespace.

This means that if you use `v1alpha1` to create a CR, the APIServer will do
validation of the input resource using the rules described by `v1alpha1` in
the CRD... but if you then turn around and use `v1alpha2` when requesting that
CR, the APIServer will use the `v1alpha2` rules to decide what fields to send.
Nothing changes about what's stored in the APIServer.

The fact that the API server doesn't know anything about what version is
stored has a number of fascinating effects, but for our purposes, they all
come down to one thing: since the API server **doesn't know** what version is
stored, **you can't actually use the apiVersion for versioning**.

This undermines _everything_ that is typically said about Kubernetes
versioning. Fundamentally, the apiVersion field is basically a lie, and we
can't modify the API server to correct this in any short term.

### Conversion Webhooks

Conversion webhooks may appear to contradict this idea of the apiVersion
basically being a lie. In fact, they don't:

- Conversion webhooks don't modify the stored resource. They do an on-the-fly
  translation at the time a request is made.

- Conversion webhooks also don't know what version is stored: they know the
  version marked as the storage version in the CRD, and the version that the
  client is using to make the request. If you store a resource using v1alpha1,
  then change the CRD to mark v1 as the stored version, a request for v1 of a
  CR will _not_ call the conversion webhook, even though the resource was
  stored using v1alpha1.

Conversion webhooks also introduce a fair amount of operational complexity, so
an ideal solution won't use them.

### `x-kubernetes-preserve-unknown-fields`

There _is_ a way to force the API server to always return all the fields
defined for a given resource: set `x-kubernetes-preserve-unknown-fields` in
the CRD. This might seem to provide a way around some of the issues we've
discussed, since it would permit a controller to see everything, intuit a
storage version from which fields are present, and perform normalization in
the client.

In practice, this makes it dramatically harder to use strongly-typed
interfaces to the API server, and introduces a fairly dramatic maintenance
burden on controller authors, especially in light of the fact that a
controller that attempts to support two versions at the same time will see
every resource appear twice, and be forced to deduplicate.

Ultimately, `x-kubernetes-preserve-unknown-fields` isn't a good idea for our
purposes.

## Options

So:

- the API server doesn't actually know what version of a resource is stored;
- we can't change that quickly;
- we don't want conversion webhooks or `x-kubernetes-preserve-unknown-fields`; and
- we need an experimental channel that can evolve rapidly.

Given all these things, our options are sharply limited.

### Version the Group

We can't really control the apiVersion, so suppose we control the group? e.g. have
`gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1` for standard, but `v1.1.gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1`.

This approach has some interesting properties. You can define shortnames in
the CRD to make it (relatively) easy for humans to be sure of which versions
they're looking at; you can trivially install multiple versions; you can
easily see which version came before which other version; you can do simple
application-level code (or even shell scripts) to convert between versions.

It also has the major advantage that, since the version now _is_ known, any
semantic change from version to version can be manageable.

However, has the downside that moving from one version to another is _always_
an active process: it requires code to be written (or at _minimum_ recompiled)
to support the new version, and anyone using experimental CRs will have to
edit all their CRs to change the group at every version. Additionally,
controller authors will need to do extra work to manage multiple groups
(though this should be relatively less painful than making end users edit
CRs).

The path from experimental to standard, here, is exactly the same as the path
from one experimental version to another -- and since we _have_ versioning
information in this model, it's straightforward to talk about what differs
from version to version and what's in use in each version.

### Rely on Most Changes Being Additive

This isn't _quite_ the same thing as saying that we're going to use standard
Kubernetes versioning rules for the experimental channel, but it's close: it's
saying that we expect that most changes to experimental won't be breaking
changes, so if we need to make a breaking change, we'll bump the apiVersion
and _remove_ the old apiVersion, so that the API server will block applying
the CRD unless the version is removed from the CRD's storedVersions. This is
what we actually did for the recent BackendTLSPolicy breaking change: require
users to take action to cross the breaking-change point, so that we shouldn't
accidentally break users.

This is fairly simple, and in practice most changes _have_ been additive.
There's still not a great way to compare versions, but the idea here is that
the Gateway API designers can exercise enough control over the experimental
channel to either make sure changes are safe, or to make sure that users have
to take explicit action.

It's worth noting that the users affected by the BackendTLSPolicy change
weren't delighted by it, but it seems to have succeeded at not destroying
anyone's cluster.

### Require Explicit Versioning in the CR

We could include a `spec.version` field in every Gateway API CR, and require
that a semantic version be placed there to indicate the stored version. This
would allow many of the same benefits as using the group to store the version,
though it makes it harder to allow conversion in practice because of the way
the API server enforces schemas. It also introduces some redundancy that's
likely to be quite annoying.

### ???

